Tadpole Density Estimation Protocol
================
Ryan Peek
*Updated: 2020-05-26*

Quantifying how many animals we observe in a given place can be useful
for estimating population size, occupancy and detection probabilities,
or tracking habitat use over time.

While there are quite a few methods for occupancy estimation, some of
the simplest field methods are Visual Encounter Surveys (VES), and
Dip-netting Sampling (DS).

Important caveats include a need to sample all microhabitats so species
with limited distributions will not be missed. In addition, we also need
to keep the timing of the survey in mind, some species will be more
active and observable during different periods, so recording the time of
day is crucial.

## Dipnet Sampling

While there are no specific rules for how many dip-net sweeps to take,
there have been several papers which assessed how much variability in
estimates of a population may shift with differing number of samples
(see Jung et al. 2002, Sanders et al. 2015, Iwai 2017). Following Heyer
et al. 1994, establish a pre-determined number of sweeps per site, and
ensure equal numbers of sweeps are conducted by all parties with nets.

To estimate densities of larvae, quantify how much water volume is
sampled with each sweep. This can be split into multiple groups (e.g.,
10 sweeps at 1/4 of the frame, 20 sweeps at 3/4 of the frame), but
should be recorded to then determine volume. In addition, use the same
sweep length across all sweeps, ideally 1m, but this can be adjusted as
needed. These data can then be used to calculate the total volume and
area sampled to estimate the relative density of species.

For montane ponds/lakes with shallow margins, one application may be as
follows: - Select a littoral reach that is representative of a habitat
or habitat types. - Conduct 60 sweeps equally interspersed across the
survey reach and count how many species and abundances of species in
each sweep. - Record and calculate the total volume of area that has
been surveyed using dipnets. - Estimate the relative density of a given
species by calculating the total observed number of tadpoles over the
total volume sampled.

This approach could be split into samples or estimates for specific
macrohabitat types or vegetation types (which could also be quantified
using random samples of quadrats that identify habitat type, cover,
vegetation, etc at a given site or reach).

## Materials

  - **D-Net/Dipnet** Different mesh sizes should be considered depending
    on the stage/size of tadpole being sampled. Aquarium dipnets are
    good for smaller habitats with shallower water and are typically
    10-15cm wide.

  - **Measuring Tape** A 50-100m tape is useful for delineating
    habitats.

  - **Quadrat** Easy to make, use a 1 m square, can subdivide into 0.25
    grid (4 squares), use pvc if preferred, but anything will do.

## Literature

Heyer, W. R., Donnelly, M. A., McDiarmid, R. W., Hayek, L.-A. C., &
Foster, M. S. (1994). Measuring and monitoring biological diversity.
Standard methods for amphibians. Smithsonian Institution Press.

Iwai, N. (2017). Estimating tadpole-detection rates using visual field
surveys: effects of survey time, tadpole species and tadpole density.
Wildlife Research, 44(2), 147–152.

Jung, R. E., Dayton, G. H., Williamson, S. J., Sauer, J. R., & Droege,
S. (2002). An Evaluation of Population Index and Estimation Techniques
for Tadpoles in Desert Pools. Journal of Herpetology, 36(3), 465–472.

Sanders, M. R., Clulow, S., Bower, D. S., Clulow, J., & Mahony, M. J.
(2015). Predator Presence and Vegetation Density Affect Capture Rates
and Detectability of Litoria aurea Tadpoles: Wide-Ranging Implications
for a Common Survey Technique. PloS One, 10(11), e0143733.
